As well as the analysis of letter frequencies, other patterns can also be detected that may help to decipher a piece of ciphertext.

The following text explains some of the clues that can be used to deduce a word or a letter in a piece of ciphertext. If you scroll further down the page, you will see a list of tables that explain letter frequencies and patterns in other languages. This will prove useful for breaking messages not written in English.

Identify Common Pairs Of Letters: If the ciphertext appears to encode a message in English, but the plaintext does not reveal itself immediately, which is often the case, then focus on pairs of repeated letters. In English the most common repeated letters are ss, ee, tt, ff, ll, mm and oo. If the ciphertext contains any repeated characters, you can assume that they represent one of these.
Identify The Smallest Words First: If the ciphertext contains spaces between words, then try to identify words containing just one, two or three letters. The only one-letter words in English are a and I. The most common two-letter words are of, to, in, it, is, be, as, at, so, we, he, by, or, on, do, if, me, my, up, an, go, no, us, am. The most common three-letter words are the and and.
Tailor Made Frequency Tables: If possible, tailor the table of frequencies to the message you are trying to decipher. E.g., military messages tend to omit pronouns and articles, and the loss of words such as I, he, a and they will reduce the frequency of some of the commonest letters. If you know you are tackling a military message, you should use a frequency table generated from other military messages.
Play The Guessing Game: This can be one of the most useful skills for a cryptanalyst to employ - the ability to identify words, or even entire phrases, based on experience or sheer guesswork. Al-Khalil, an early Arabian cryptanalyst, demonstrated this talent when he cracked a Greek ciphertext. He guessed that the ciphertext began with the greeting 'In the name of God'. Having established that these letters corresponded to a specific section of ciphertext, he could use them as a crowbar to prise open the rest of the ciphertext. This is known as a crib.
Letter and word frequencies have been analysed in a number of different languages. A few of the most commonly used ones are listed below, and may help you to decipher your secret messages...

ENGLISH
Order Of Frequency Of Single Letters
E T A O I N S H R D L U
Order Of Frequency Of Digraphs
th er on an re he in ed nd ha at en es of or nt ea ti to it st io le is ou ar as de rt ve
Order Of Frequency Of Trigraphs
the and tha ent ion tio for nde has nce edt tis oft sth men
Order Of Frequency Of Most Common Doubles
ss ee tt ff ll mm oo
Order Of Frequency Of Initial Letters
T O A W B C D S F M R H I Y E G L N P U J K
Order Of Frequency Of Final Letters
E S T D N R Y F L O G H A K M P U W
One-Letter Words
a, I
Most Frequent Two-Letter Words
of, to, in, it, is, be, as, at, so, we, he, by, or, on, do, if, me, my, up, an, go, no, us, am
Most Frequent Three-Letter Words
the, and, for, are, but, not, you, all, any, can, had, her, was, one, our, out, day, get, has, him, his, how, man, new, now, old, see, two, way, who, boy, did, its, let, put, say, she, too, use
Most Frequent Four-Letter Words
that, with, have, this, will, your, from, they, know, want, been, good, much, some, time

SPANISH
Order Of Frequency Of Single Letters
E A O S R I N L D C T U P M Y Q G B H F V J Z K W X
Most Common Digraphs
es en el de la os ar ue ra re er as on st ad ai or ta co se ac ec ci ia
Most Common Trigraphs
que est ara ado aqu del cio nte osa ede per ist nei res sde
Most Frequent Doubles
ee ll rr aa ss cc dd nn
One-Letter Words
a, e, o, u, y
Most Common Two-Letter Words:
en, la, de, Io, el, se

To prove the importance of secure ciphers, here is the tragic story of Mary Queen of Scots, who was foolish enough to use a weak cipher in the 16th century, long after codebreakers had mastered frequency analysis.

To cut a long story short, Mary wanted to assassinate Queen Elizabeth I, and began exchanging messages with her co-conspirators, in particular Anthony Babington. This was dubbed the Babington Plot. Their messages were so treacherous that they were enciphered, so that they could not be read if they fell into the wrong hands.

The cipher that Mary used is shown below. It has a cipher alphabet, with substitutions for each letter from A to Z. The cipher also contains some code symbols for the most common words, and some more sophisticated symbols. This mixture of codes and ciphers is known as a nomenclator.

Mary's messages were captured by Elizabeth's spies and they were cracked by her chief codebreaker. Mary was immediately arrested, put on trial and the deciphered messages were used as evidence of her treachery. She was found guilty and was executed in 1587 all because her cipher was cracked.